[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In the summer of 1520,
the Spanish expedition led
by Portuguese explorer Ferdinand
Magellan was well into its
circumnavigation of the globe.
By the time they reached
the shores of Argentina,
they had already encountered
several native tribes.
But there was something special
about the natives of this land.
And the account from Antonio
Pigafetta, the voyage's
official chronicler,
would capture
the imaginations of
Westerners for years to come.
According to his journal,
the natives of Patagonia
were giants.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Myths and legends
of giants go back
through every culture in
every corner of the world.
And in many cases, the
mythological aspect
of these giants is obvious.
Take, for example, Atlas, the
giant from Greek mythology,
who was tasked with holding
the world on his shoulders.
But sometimes, the stories
aren't so heavily exaggerated.
And there is even evidence that
giants did once walk the Earth.
In the 1800s, as
European settlers
continued to expand west
across the United States,
they started coming
across earthen mounds that
had been constructed by native
inhabitants of North America.
The settlers started
excavating the mounds,
with little regard for
the native cultures, who
had built them for religious,
ceremonial, and burial
purposes.
And the sensational
headlines regarding
what was found in those mounds
all reported one thing--
skeletons.
Giant skeletons.
But these weren't just
a few obscure papers.
These were reputable sources,
like the "New York Times"
and "Scientific American."
Even Abraham Lincoln
references the giants in 1848
during a visit to
Niagara Falls, saying,
"The eyes of that species
of extinct giants,
whose bones fill the
mounds of America,
have gazed on Niagara
as ours do now."
According to the numerous
articles published
during this time, the
skeletons were regularly
found to be between
7 and 10 feet tall.
And some even reported
taller individuals,
like the one mentioned
in this "New York Times"
article from 1885.
"If the whole frame
is in proportion
to two thigh bones
that were found,
their owner must have
stood at 14 feet high.
A representative of the
Smithsonian Institution
is here investigating
the curious relic."
The fact that it was
being investigated
by a representative
of the Smithsonian
may not seem out
of the ordinary,
but it appears to be a theme
seen throughout these reports.
Some believe that
the Smithsonian
was involved in covering
up these artifacts, which
were often surrendered to
the museum for further study.
This theory is
supported by the fact
that no studies or exhibitions
follow the initial reports
of these anomalous discoveries.
And the accounts become
even more compelling
when you consider how
many oral traditions
of the Native American
tribes in those regions
tell of a race of giants.
In a more recent
discovery, 205 graves
were unearthed in China's
Shandong Province.
The archaeological dig found
that a significant number
of these men stood
around the 6' mark,
with the tallest man
standing at 6' 3".
Now this may not seem incredibly
tall by today's standards.
After all, the average
height of today's NBA player
is around 6' 7".
But 5,000 years ago when these
Longshan people were still
alive, they would
have loomed over
their Neolithic
contemporaries, who were
much shorter by comparison.
The Central American
Mayans, for example,
had an average male
height of 5' 2",
and an average female
height of 4' 8".
The giants of Longshan were
unusually tall for their time,
but their height wasn't
out of the realm of what
we consider possible
within the established
narrative of our past.
So what happens when we find
evidence that could completely
upend that narrative?
In the 1960s, miners
in the Otavi Mountains
of northern Namibia discovered
the fossilized segment
of a femur.
The mineralized
bone was turned over
to Phillip Tobias, the
late paleoanthropologist
from South Africa.
And it remains in his vault at
Wits University in Johannesburg
to this day.
In Michael Tellinger's
video, posted in 2013,
he visits Professor
Francis Thackeray
at the university to view
the impressive artifact.
The professor identifies
the mineralized bone
as having belonged
to a homosapien.
And when he brings out
an average-sized femur
for comparison, the
difference is clear.
The fossilized femur appears
to be at least twice the size
of the normal one.
But despite the
abnormal size, there
seems to be no outside
interests in studying or dating
the artifact.
One piece of femur
doesn't exactly
amount to proof of
a race of giants.
But anthropologists
agree that there
are large gaps in the
fossil record that
mask absolute truths.
Even the researchers who
completed the largest
study of hominid body
size throughout evolution
sometimes had to estimate
heights based off fragments
as small as a single toe bone.
How would our
evolutionary tree differ
if they had recovered
fragments of someone
like Robert Wadlow, the tallest
man in recorded history.
Known as the "Giant
of Illinois,"
Wadlow reached a height at 8'
11" before his death in 1940.
He suffered from hyperplasia
of his pituitary gland, which
results in an abnormally high
level of human growth hormone.
And most of the well-known
giants of our time
suffered from similar disorders.
This photo shows Wadlow
standing next to his father.
Harold Wadlow was a man on the
taller side of average at 5'
11".
But standing next to his son,
he appears almost dwarf-like,
with his head coming up
just over his son's waist.
And this comparison
happens to be
reminiscent of the
giants of Patagonia.
The following excerpt is from
Antonio Pigafetta's journal.
"But one day, without
anyone expecting it,
we saw a giant who
was on the shore.
And he was so tall
that the tallest of us
only came up to his waist."
The account goes on to say
that two of these giants
were seized as hostages but
didn't survive the journey
back to Spain, which may sound
like a convenient coincidence.
But considering that only
18 of the 270 men who
began the voyage made it back
alive, their odds of survival
weren't so great to begin with.
Even Magellan himself
didn't make it back.
60 years later, when Sir Francis
Drake made it to Patagonia
during his
circumnavigation, his nephew
wrote that Magellan
had exaggerated
the height of these
natives, stating
that the men were only
five cubits, which
is 7 and 1/2 feet.
So even by today's standards,
these were massive people.
We may never know if a race
of giants walked the earth
or know for sure
how much truth there
is to the giant
mythologies present
throughout every culture.
But consider this--
most animals that
walk the earth today have a
giant prehistoric ancestor.
Great white sharks
have the megalodon,
who beats their size
by about 40 feet.
Then there's the
titanoboa, a snake which
reached 42 feet in length.
Even sloths had a giant
ancestor, the megatherium,
who were as big as
modern day elephants.
So is it really out of
the realm of possibility
for humans to have had
giant ancestors too?
[MUSIC PLAYING]